Knowledge base on runtime benchmarking (#879)
substrate-developer-hub/substrate-developer-hub.github.io: docs/knowledgebase/runtime/benchmarking.md

---
title: Runtime Benchmarking
---

## What Is Runtime Benchmarking?

In Substrate, each block must be produced within a certain time limit to keep the blockchain healthy
and functional. This is the target blocktime. So in each block production phase, Substrate can only
take so many extrinsic calls and compute for their results. We use weight to represent how much
computations are needed for a runtime extrinsic.

> Some extrinsics has more computation and has a larger weight. If this extrinsic is included, then

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some extrinsics have more computation and therefore have a larger weight. If this extrinsic is included, then
```

there is less capacity left to include other extrinsics in the block. This is further explained in
the [Transaction Weight chapter](../learn-substrate/weight).

In Substrate, **10^12 Weight = 1 Second**, and i.e 1,000 weight = 1 nanosecond, measured on a

> referenced hardware.

Reviewer: need reference to what is the _reference hardware_.

Author: added to the footnote.

So we want to have an estimate of how much computation it takes before actually running the
extrinsics, and this will also affect how much transaction fee we charge beforehand. If the
extrinsic turns out to run with less computation, some of the estimated weight can be returned, and
eventually causing the transaction fee returned back to user. This is further explained in the
[Transaction Fees chapter](./fees).

Now the question is how do we determine the computation time and weight of our extrinsics? There
might also be a relationship between the time and the input or the existing state (the current
database storage) when running the extrinsic. As any computer scientist can tell, we are getting
into a time complexity analysis of the function.

> This is where Substrate Runtime Benchmarking comes in. It has a set of toolchain to help determine

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is where Substrate Runtime Benchmarking comes in. It has a set of toolchains to help determine
```

## Why Benchmark a Runtime Pallet?

Denial-of-service (DoS) is a common attack vector for distributed systems, including blockchain
networks. A simple example would be for any user repeatedly requesting a function that involve
intensive computation. An effective counter-measure is that such a request would bear a certain cost
to the user. For a fair system, the user cost should reflect the computation and storage cost
incurred to the system. To encourage users to use such system, we want to estimate this cost
relatively accurately and not overcharging users.

Now with Substrate benchmarking toolchain, runtime developers can estimate the weight of their
runtime extrinsics which translate to the transaction fee charged to the runtime users. So it is
critical to benchmark our runtime extrinsics to measure how the extrinsic computation changes with
repect to its input and set the proper weight functions for these extrinsics. Setting a proper
weight function that reflects accurately on the underlying computation and storage is an important
security safeguard in Substrate.

## Features of Substrate Benchamrking Toolchain

> - You can configure multiple input variables to be used when benchmarking an extrinsic. For each

Reviewer: would be good to link to the `benchmarks!` macro do somewhere here, it as very good documentation.

Author: added on L#85

  input, you can configure the varying range and the number of times to repeat to avoid outlier
  effect.

- The toolchain leverages on rust macro and have a flexible structure of:

  1. Setting up the initial state before running the benchmark
  2. Measuring the execution time and database storage read write
  3. Finally verifying the result

    ```rust
    benchmarks! {
      extrinsic1_name {
        /* setup initial state */
      }: {
        /* the code to be benchmarked */
      }
      verify {
        /* verifying final state */
      }
    }
    ```

- At the end, it deduces a multi-variable linear equation for the weight function on how the
  computation time changes with respect to the change of your specified variables.

- It generates a `WeightInfo` structure in Rust that can either be further tweaked, or easily

>   integrated and called in your runtime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  integrated into your runtime.
```

To see a step-by-step detail procedure, please refer to our [Tutorial on Runtime
Benchmarking](../../tutorials/runtime-benchmarking).

1. In [the pallet
   `Cargo.toml`](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/blob/master/frame/example/Cargo.toml), add
   the dependent benchmarking crates.

    ```toml
    # ...

    [dependencies]
    # -- snip --
    frame-benchmarking = { version = "3.1.0", default-features = false, path = "../benchmarking", optional = true }

    [features]
    # -- snip --
    runtime-benchmarks = ["frame-benchmarking"]
    ```

2. Start writing our benchmarking code. The code can be placed either in a `mod` module inside the
   `src/lib.rs`, or be put in a separate file and include the module back in `src/lib.rs`. We will
   use the first approach in the following to create the basic structure.

    ```rust
    #[cfg(feature = "runtime-benchmarks")]
    mod benchmarking {
      use super::*;
      use frame_benchmarking::{benchmarks, account, impl_benchmark_test_suite};
      use frame_system::RawOrigin;

      benchmarks!{
        // Individual benchmark cases here
      }

>       impl_benchmark_test_suite!(Pallet, crate::tests::new_test_ext(),
>         crate::tests::Test);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      impl_benchmark_test_suite!(
        Pallet, 
        crate::tests::new_test_ext(),
        crate::tests::Test,
      );
```

    }
    ```

3. Each benchmark case has three sections, setup section, execution section, and optionally a
   verification section at the end.

    ```rust
    benchmarks!{
      extrinsic_name {
        // setup initial state
      }: {
        // running the benchmark
      }
      verify {
        // Using assert statements to verify the result, or check certain on-chain event has been emitted.
      }
    }
    ```

    An example in
    [`example/src/lib.rs`](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/blob/master/frame/example/src/lib.rs):

    ```rust
    // This will measure the execution time of `set_dummy` for b in [1..1000] range.
    set_dummy_benchmark {
      let b in 1 .. 1000;
    }: {

>       set_dummy (RawOrigin::Root, b.into());

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      set_dummy(RawOrigin::Root, b.into());
```

    }
    ```

    The name of the benchmark case is `set_dummy_benchmark`. Here `b` is the input that passed into
    the extrinsic `set_dummy`. `b` will be varied from 1 to 1,000 and run repeatedly for each value
    of `b` according to the arguments we passed when running the benchmark command. We will get back
    to this in the following.

    The function `set_dummy` is called in the execution section, and we do not verify the result at
    the end.

    You will also see code like this:

    ```rust
    accumulate_dummy {
      let b in 1 .. 1000;
      let caller = account("caller", 0, 0);

>     }: _ (RawOrigin::Signed(caller), b.into())

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    }: _(RawOrigin::Signed(caller), b.into())
```

    ```

    This is when the execution section is just a one-line code that call the extrinsic with the same
    name as the benchmarking case name. Our `benchmark!` macro is smart enough to know that!

4.
    ```rust
    benchmarks! {
      // -- snip
      impl_benchmark_test_suite!(Pallet, crate::tests::new_test_ext(),
        crate::tests::Test);
    }
    ```

    At the last line in the `benchmarks!` macro, `impl_benchmark_test_suite!` takes three input: the

>     module name, the function that generates a test genesis storage `new_text_ext()`, and a test

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    module name, the function that generates a test genesis storage (i.e. `new_text_ext()`), and a test
```

>     runtime we built when writing our test cases, and expand them into testing code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    runtime, and expand them into testing code. The test runtime can often be the same one used for testing. 
```

This is better, because some benchmarks might need special mock-ing.

>     Ultimately benchmarking code is expanded as testing code, so it takes the code you write in

Reviewer: I find this to be a bit confusing. The whole benchmarking does indeed _not_ expand to testing code, whereas the opposite, it should be run with `--release`. The testing portion is executed in a debug release.

As noted above, I think you can rework this section maybe, just to point out that: 
1. hey, you need a mock runtime for testing your benchmarks as well
2. hey, you might be able to re-use the one from your pallet testing
3. [additional links etc]

Author: I just finish reading the [benchmark! doc](https://substrate.dev/rustdocs/v3.0.0/frame_benchmarking/macro.benchmarks.html) and want to clarify what `impl_benchmark_test_suite!` does. 

- So running `substrate benchmark` actually doesn't run the code generated by `impl_benchmark_test_suite!`?
- It generates code to be run in `cargo test`, and run with the high and low values of  complexity parameters and see if it returns an `Ok(())`?

Reviewer: >  So running substrate benchmark actually doesn't run the code generated by impl_benchmark_test_suite!?

No, that only runs the main benchmark code. The tests are run if you go into your pallet and run `cargo test --all-features`, or if you have done: 

```
#[cfg(any(test, feature = "runtime-benchmakr))]
mod benchmarking;
``` 

Then any `cargo test` will run the benchmark code as well. 

Some pallets do this, some don't afaik. I personally like this. The only downside is that if a benchmark test takes a lot of time, it will pollute the main test suite. But this is a rare case.

Reviewer: > It generates code to be run in cargo test, and run with the high and low values of complexity parameters and see if it returns an Ok(())?

Correct. I think it generates just 3 steps per benchmark, with repeat=1, where the 3 steps are [low, mid, high] of the range.

    testing (you do, right?) to build up [the mock
    runtime](https://substrate.dev/docs/en/knowledgebase/runtime/tests#mock-runtime-environment). If
    you are not familiar with how pallet test cases are written, please refer to our [Runtime Tests
    chapter](tests).

5. With all the code completed on the pallet side, you need to add code in the node runtime. First
   add the necessary dependencies in [the runtime
   `Cargo.toml`](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/blob/master/bin/node/runtime/Cargo.toml).

    ```toml
    [dependencies]
    # -- snip --
    pallet-you-named = { version = ..., default-features = false, path = ... }

    [features]
    std = [
      # -- snip --
      "pallet-you-named/std"

>     ]

Reviewer: Technically unrelated, but I agree that comparing this with std makes the learning experience better.

    runtime-benchmarks = [
      # -- snip --
      "pallet-you-named/runtime-benchmarks"
    ]
    ```

    Then in the node runtime, as usual, have your runtime implemements the pallet configurable trait
    and add the pallet in `construct_runtime!`. For details, refer to [Add a Pallet to Your Runtime
    Tutorial](../../tutorials/add-a-pallet). Then our runtime also implements
    `frame_benchmarking::Benchmark` trait under a feature flag, and implement the
    `dispatch_benchmark` method, as [shown in the

>     file](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/blob/master/bin/node/runtime/src/lib.rs#L1412).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    file](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/blob/master/bin/node/runtime/src/lib.rs#L1412).
```

This link will become invalid any day as it is not bound to a commit, and only line number.

Author: updated.

    ```rust
    #[cfg(feature = "runtime-benchmarks")]
    impl frame_benchmarking::Benchmark<Block> for Runtime {
      fn dispatch_benchmark(
        config: frame_benchmarking::BenchmarkConfig
      ) -> Result<Vec<frame_benchmarking::BenchmarkBatch>, sp_runtime::RuntimeString> {
        // -- snip --

        let whitelist: Vec<TrackedStorageKey> = vec![
          // whitelisting a set of storage keys here
        ];

        let mut batches = Vec::<BenchmarkBatch>::new();
        let params = (&config, &whitelist);

        // Adding the pallet you will perform thee benchmarking
        add_benchmark!(params, batches, pallet_you_named, YourPallet);

        // -- snip --

        if batches.is_empty() { return Err("Benchmark not found for this pallet.".into()) }
        Ok(batches)
      }
    }
    ```

    There seems to be a lot of code, but we are mainly setting up an environment that all

>     benchmarking code will run, such as we pass in a set of storage keys that should not be counted

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    benchmarking code will run. For example, we pass in a set of storage keys that should not be counted
```

how `b` changes.

The benchmark library gives us both a median slope analysis; that the execution time of a particular
`b` value is taken as the median value of the repeated runs, and a [min. square
analysis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Least_squares) that is better explained in a statistics
primer.

You can also derive your own coefficients given you have the raw data on each run, say maybe you
know the computation time will not be a linear but an *O(nlogn)* relationship with the input
variable. So you need to determine the coefficient differently.

### Auto-generated `WeightInfo` Implementation

The second output is an autogenerated `WeightInfo` implementation. This file defines weight
functions of benchmarked extrinsics with the computed coefficient above. You can directly integrated
this file in your extrinsics weight function or further customize them if so desired. The
auto-generated implementation is designed to make end-to-end benchmark automation easy.

To use this file, you first define a `WeightInfo` trait in
[`frame/example/src/lib.rs`](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/blob/master/frame/example/src/lib.rs):

```rust

> pub trait WeightInfo {

Reviewer: hmm wait -- WeightInfo is also generated in as the output.

Author: I believe by default when running benchmark as is, it doesn't generate the trait, but just the implementation. It is for Substrate now because the CI/developer is using [frame-weight-template.hbs](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/blob/v3.0.0/.maintain/frame-weight-template.hbs) as the template to generate the `weightInfo` implementation by passing additional `--template` cli argument. 

I am not covering WeightInfo template here and just introducing the default generated `WeightInfo` impl output. 

@shawntabrizi Just want to confirm if my understanding is correct.

Reviewer: You are correct but my question is why not cover this? I personally have found it a bit of pain to manually maintain correct signatures in `Trait WeightInfo` and the fact that it can be autogenerated, IMO, is important.

  fn accumulate_dummy(_b: u32, ) -> Weight;
  fn set_dummy(_b: u32, ) -> Weight;
  fn another_set_dummy(b: u32, ) -> Weight;
  fn sort_vector(x: u32, ) -> Weight;
}
```

The generated file implements these weight functions. To integrate them, we can copy the generated
file into the directory where `lib.rs` is located and named it as `weights.rs`.

In the `frame/example/src/lib.rs`, we have:

```rust
pub mod weights;  // importing the `weights.rs` here

pub mod pallet {
  // -- snip --
  #[pallet::call]
  impl<T: Config> Pallet<T> {

>     #[pallet::weight(<T as pallet::Config>::WeightInfo::accumulate_dummy(0))]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    #[pallet::weight(T::WeightInfo::accumulate_dummy(0))]
```

```

With `--steps 20 --repeat 10` in the benchmark input arguments, `b` will walk 20 steps to reach
1,000, so `b` will start from 1 and increment by about 50. For each value of `b`, we will execute
the benchmark 10 times and record the benchmark information.

![multi-variables-regression](assets/runtime/benchmarking/multi-variables-regression.png)

A more complete command that we use for the Substrate benchmarking output looks like this:

```bash
cargo run --release
  --features=runtime-benchmarks
  --manifest-path=bin/node/cli/Cargo.toml
  --
  benchmark
  --chain=dev
  --steps=50
  --repeat=20
  --pallet=frame_system
  --extrinsic="*"
  --execution=wasm
  --wasm-execution=compiled
  --heap-pages=4096
  --output=./frame/system/src/weights.rs
  --template=./.maintain/frame-weight-template.hbs
```

However, the exact command you run will depend on your needs.

> **Notes**
>
> Another argument introduced above is `--template`. We allow you to specify your own weight
> template file and the benchmarking toolchain will fill in the exact numbers from the measured
> result. This enables automating weight generation in your desired code format and integrates this
> in your CI process.

> 

Author: @kianenigma added a paragraph here telling readers they can use `--template` to customize the weightinfo implementation.

  fn another_set_dummy(b: u32, ) -> Weight;
  fn sort_vector(x: u32, ) -> Weight;
}
```

Here, associated function `set_dummy` take a parameter. This is because we have the line
`let b in 1 .. 1000;` in our `set_dummy` benchmarking function, indicating the execution time
likely be affected by this parameter.

The generated file implements these associated functions. To integrate them, we can copy the
generated file into the directory where `lib.rs` is located and named it as `weights.rs`.

In the `frame/example/src/lib.rs`, we have:

```rust
// importing the `weights.rs` here
pub mod weights;

pub mod pallet {
  // -- snip --
  #[pallet::call]
  impl<T: Config> Pallet<T> {
    #[pallet::weight(
      T::WeightInfo::set_dummy((*new_value).saturated_into())
    )]
    pub(super) fn set_dummy(
      origin: OriginFor<T>,
      #[pallet::compact] new_value: T::Balance,
    ) -> DispatchResultWithPostInfo {
      // -- snip

      // All good, no refund.
      Ok(().into())
    }
  }
}
```

For each extrinsic, we add an attribute macro `pallet::weight` and pass in the weight implementation
function with the same name as the extrinsic and variables that affect the weight. We can pass

> extrinsic parameters as weight function inputs to estimated the final weight.

Author: @kianenigma see if this addresses your last comment.
